
Related Work

(Use GDoc)



Shapiro Explanation


Next, we need to determine which phase or cycle, the volcanoes most correspond with. This does not guarantee that the force is causing the changes in volcanic eruptions, but a similar frequency would indicate that there may be a relationship between the cyclical patterns of these forces and volcanic eruption rates.

Hence, in order to see which frequency the volcanic eruptions are most corresponding to, we took the volcanic data and modeled the histogram of the number of volcanic eruptions versus time using a sinusoidal model with a frequency similar to each of the tidal forces.  Next, we subtracted this sinusoidal model from the volcanic data and if by removing this cyclical phase, we loose any form of a trend or cyclical pattern, then that is reason to believe that the period lengths are similar.  

Hence, we used the Shapiro-Wilks test after subtracting the frequency to see if the data exhibited normality, which would mean that the subtracted phase is very similar to the phase of the volcanic data.  We decided to use the Shapiro-Wilk test because (1) it is used to test for normality with a set of samples and the result of this tests would be a p-value, which is very easy to interpret. The p-value would tell us whether we should accept the null hypothesis that the data came from a distribution that is normal or reject the null hypothesis and assume it came from a distribution that is not normal.  In addition, the Shapiro-Wilk test does not require us to produce an estimate of the mean and variance upfront, which makes it very agreeable to exploratory analysis, where we seek to uncover these parameters of interest.


Random Forest Regressor

In order to determine the importance of the features, we decided to use a Random Forest Regressor. The reason being, a Random Forest Regressor uses a decision tree to randomly tests different subset of features. Through this random selection and separation of features, we are able to arrive at an estimator that has a greater chance of "stumbling" onto the optimal decomposition of features. Given that our target variable is non-categorical we use a regressor instead of a classifier.  In addition, sklearn's Random Forest Regressor model comes with a feature importance estimator that is useful in allowing us to see which features were ultimately the most important in predicting the output.


VEI
Considered to be the Volcanic Explosivity Index, the VEI provides a measure of how explosive a volcanic eruption was.  Values range from 0 to 8, with 0 being the lowest and 8 being the highest.   Explosions from 0 - 2 can occur on a weekly basis, 3 - 4 can occur on a weekly to yearly basis, 5 on a decadal basis. Volcanoes with 6 and beyond are very rare and occur very intermittently.

To put it in perspective, in the 19th century there were approximately 6 volcanoes with a VEI of 5, 2 volcanoes with a VEI of 6 and 1 volcano with a VEI of 7.  The VEI of 7 was considered the largest and deadliest volcano in recorded history.


Eruption Length
While the majority of volcanoes have eruption lengths that last less than a year, about 15% erupt over a year, with the longest lasting two decades or more.  An eruption is considered "finished" when a certain measure of decompression is attained within the volcano.


Elevation
Volcanoes have various elevation ranges (usually between 1,000m to 6,000m). Given that volcanoes are known for their height, there may be some significance between the height of the volcano and its other features. Hence, we felt it important enough to include in our analysis




Visualization
Next, we created a visualization, which can be run by typing "python volcano_gui.py" into the command line.  This GUI was an idea created because uncovering patterns is very necessary when performing any type of exploratory analysis.  Through the use of juxtaposition, we place tidal forces data next to the number of volcanic eruptions in order to visually see if a relationship exists between the two. 

The visualization, while effective, proved to be less useful than we first imagined. This is because our data is very sparse, so animated plot is very angular.  Nevertheless, we still gained important insight about the cyclical nature of volcanic data.  The rising of the forces tends to coincide with ...

